190929_1601 Transcription
Jazma Sutton: Jazma Sutton, Rowan’s mother’s town tour.

Participant: Gonna try and get Anna-lisa Cox’s book, get that out as much as possible because
that talks about….

Jazma Sutton: I’ve been seeing her book everywhere over the internet recently!
Participant: Yes, this is not unusual.
 We thought, you know, even I thought this was unusual, no.

This is part of….

Jazma Sutton: Even me, 5 years ago when I first started doing it.
 And then she has this book and
I’m like “Oh!”
Participant: Okay, right after here you’ll make a right turn into the driveway.
 Keep going up to
the fencepost, right here.
 The house we think was built in 1850, close to it.

Jazma Sutton: Okay, we’ll just get out really fast.

Participant: Yeah.

Jazma Sutton: We’re just, we’re just gonna get out really fast and like…
Participant: The house was built in 1850 but…
Jazma Sutton: You bought the land in 1822?
Participant: 1823(?)
Jazma Sutton: Can you record? Like video?
Participant: This shows up in all the history books.

Jazma Sutton: Yeah.

Participant: This was 1822, but I have the original deed, 1818.
 I beat the history books! So we’re
putting on the historic monument “1818.
”
Jazma Sutton: And it was how far out here?
Participant: The road was that way.
 The road was there.

Interviewer 2: What about the barn?
Participant: It was an English two-bay barn.
 Two… three bays, sorry.

[muffled walking sounds]
Participant: [??????].
 This says “I made it! I’m rich.
”
Jazma Sutton: This is awesome.

Participant: And what I mean by that is if you go to the Levi Kauffman house, it has headlights,
but not sidelights.
 This has got sidelights.
 The, uh, the foundation is limestone.
 So, he’s
showing… one of the ways to show you’re rich is you a limestone foundation.
 To, um, and what
that picture [???], what was over the door.

Jazma Sutton: And they missed the beginning part… you said that the land was bought…
Participant: bought in 1822.
 This particular piece of property.

Jazma Sutton: And this was the home of the first black landowner in…
Participant: Yes, James [???].
 Bought land in 1818.
 He was the first one here that officially
bought land.

Jazma Sutton: Can I look in the window?
Participant: Yeah, that’s why I want to show you the, the fireplace.
 You can see the fireplace
from here, but you can see it, do you see the fireplace?
Jazma Sutton: Oh man, I need to come in here one day.

Participant: You can see it inside.
 You see, you see?
Jazma Sutton: Okay, we can do it quickly.

Participant: It has African motif.
 We think it’s related to a tribe in Africa, but we can’t really tell.

Jazma Sutton 3: Do you know where the [???]’s were from?
Participant: Hm?
Jazma Sutton: Do you know where they were from?
Jazma Sutton: Virginia.

Participant: They were from Rockingham County in Virginia.
 Actually, James was the son of a
white man from Augusta County, and…
Jazma Sutton: Are we going this way?
Participant: Yeah.
 Sophia was the daughter of um….

Jazma Sutton: Adam Sellers.

Participant: Rockingham County, [???] slavemaster.

Jazma Sutton: What?
Participant: Excuse the mess because…
Jazma Sutton: No, it’s fine.

Participant: The racoons have gotten inside it.

Jazma Sutton: [???] actually go into [???].

Participant: Whew, it smells funky.
 This is what I’ve said, this is the modernization when they
put in the sink.
 But, they actually look like that.
 There’s this big old empty area that they put the
sink in.

Jazma Sutton: Oh, look at the chandelier!
Participant: This is the, see the boing boing boing? Smaller, larger, larger.
 And, we think that a
tribe in Africa, it’s related to a tribe in Africa because I’ve been [????] this, never seen a mantle
like that before.
 There’s one that’s similar to it in Cherokee Chief in Georgia.
 I went to the house
and it has a mantle similar to that.

Jazma Sutton: We can put some of this corner, as this as an object, this house as an object.

[mumbling]
Interviewer 2: How long was this place inhabited for?
Participant: About, uh, 1980’s.

Jazma Sutton: 1850 to 1980.
 And supposedly they assist their runaways here too, right? This is
huge.

[lots of mumbling/ unintelligible chatter]
Jazma Sutton: Do people go upstairs?
Participant: Um, you can but there’s no [??], and there’s probably lots of excrement of racoons in
there.

Jazma Sutton: Can you just walk up the stairs with your camera? I’m not gonna go all the way, I
just wanna see.

Interviewer 2: Oh, there’s lots of crap up there.

Participant: Is there lots of excrement up there?
Interviewer 2: Right there, yeah.

Jazma Sutton: Look at the room! This is so big.

[mumbling/ chatter]
Jazma Sutton: What would this have been? What would this have been?
Participant: This is another room.
 The bathroom was put in later….
[mumbling].

Jazma Sutton: Because the lamp that Cleo had, Ms.
 Cleo had, Ms.
 Cleo.
 Um, said they didn’t have
electricity until she was a teenager, so that was the lamp, the light that they used to use.
 Finally I
feel complete! This is the only place I hadn’t been! It’s so weird how they add, like in today’s
time, they put these roads and stuff so what is like, even at the Levi Kauffman house, like the
back of their house ends up being on the main road when that was the front and it's more towards
that way.
 I’m gonna look in the barn, there’s probably all types of [???].
 There’s still a piece of
the wagon in there! Can you take a photo of that? I know they was hiding slaves up in here.
 If
you go to the… I wish we had time to go to the Levi Kauffman one, cuz he’s like the most
known for helping on the Underground Railroad, and if this house looks, that house is held up to
be something special, but that house is WAY bigger.
 Okay, we’re just gonna stop at the other
ones.


190929_1612 Transcription
Participant: And then it goes another mile past Stingley Road.

Jazma Sutton: Down toward continued…
Participant: [???].

Jazma Sutton: Can you speak on the significance of the border? Um, and how they would migrate
and move from one place to another?
Participant: Yeah, the, when I was researching, it was called “tri racial communities.
” On the
East Coast a professor noticed that they were located on borders.
 And, he theorized they were
located on borders that if one community passed laws against blacks, they can move across it.

So, it became a very helpful with the Underground Railroad.
 ‘Cuz, when Levy Kauffman would
send, if he had escaped slaves, and the slave hunters were in Indiana, he’d send them by way of
here, which is Ohio.
 And vice-versa, if the slave hunters were in Ohio, he’d send ‘em…
Jazma Sutton: Because they couldn’t cross over into the next state.

Participant: Yeah, they could cross into the next state and any search warrants they had had to be
renewed, right? Because it’s a different state.

Jazma Sutton: Would that be the Habeas Corpus?
Interviewer 2: Would that change after the Fugitive Slave Act was passed?
Participant: Um, you still, well, the Fugitive Slave Act… no keep going straight… changed
things because when then all you needed was another white person to vouch that that was your
slave.
 So I guess, in that sense…
Jazma Sutton: And they couldn’t testify if you were black at that time?
Participant: Right, right.
 Uh, they also used it, um…
Jazma Sutton: So what about after Indiana and Ohio becomes a state, and the laws are kinda set in
place?
Participant: Well then, they used it for, um, baseball games.
 The Longtown Tigers, the baseball
team, had their field in Ohio, but Ohio had Blue Laws.
 Do you know what Blue Laws are? Oh
you don’t.
 Nothing but church and eat on Sundays, that was the law.
 Can’t shop, can’t do
anything else.
 And so, if they wanted to play baseball, they’d go across the line and play
baseball! Where there was no laws against black baseball on Sunday.
 In church, the AME church
was actually right up here.

Jazma Sutton: Across from the Union Literary Institute?
Participant: Yes, correct, it was somewhere along in here.
 It was the ….

Jazma Sutton: Could someone take a photo of that, like once we get to the Union Literary
Institute?
Participant: [????] is probably better know where it is.
 And then, in the 1870’s they actually
picked up the church and moved it across the line, to Ohio.

Jazma Sutton: The AME church?
Participant: The AME church.
 Because, I think racism was becoming more profound in Indiana.

Um, slow down, and make a left turn.

Jazma Sutton: And we’re just gonna like, take a photo and we’re not gonna get all out the car.

Participant: Okay.
 There’s the historic marker.
 There is the Union Literacy Institute.

Interviewer 2: Alright you want me to get… to jump out?
Jazma Sutton: Yeah, that’s fine.
 And, it’s only to place it.
 So, you can get one from like the front
right here.

Interviewer 2: Alright, I’ll get one from the side too.

Jazma Sutton: Okay.

Participant: Again, this is… there was a whole separate city over here, sorta mirrored
community.
 You know, what was in Ohio was in Indiana.
 [???] the same, but…
Jazma Sutton: So, did they intermingle together? Like…
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
 Oh yeah, they married, they crossed the line, they…
Jazma Sutton: So, they did not care about that… and that’s what I thought.
 I assumed that, but I’m
like…
Participant: They didn’t care.
 They fornicated, they did whatever…
Jazma Sutton: But it was, but it was beneficial when it came to the law.

Participant: Right, correct.

Jazma Sutton: That’s good.

Participant: When it came to families, sex, whatever, no [gibberish].

Jazma Sutton: I was talking to Ricky, not Ricky Cottman but the other Ricky, he was telling me
how, like, first cousins, his mom was like when he came here “don’t marry, don’t you date none
of them!”
Participant: Yes.
 But there was a … this is the last real building that’s standing on the Indiana
side.

Jazma Sutton: Because I know there was more, where was the other part of the building [??]
Participant: The superintendent's house was right over here.
 Which was the, the superintendent
lived down below, first floor, and then above it was little rooms for boarders to stay, to go to
school.
 Do you remember seeing… It's a two-story building.
 The first floor was where the
superintendent taught, and then above it was little rooms where students would spend a semester,
um, being educated.

Jazma Sutton: In this one?
Participant: No, in the one…
Jazma Sutton: Oh, in the one that was….
 Did you get across the street? Okay cool.

Participant: Superintendent's house was right over here, and that was torn down probably in the
1960’s.

Jazma Sutton: Okay.

Participant: [???].
 But then it was a boarding school, so you had students…
Jazma Sutton: I saw that, um, is it Louisa Cottman… no her mother Agnes Cottman, Agnes Robins
Cottman and her husband were the superintendents right before, during the Civil War.

Participant: Yeah.
 Well, again, it’s such a historic building, but it’s in such bad shape.
 But, as I
explain to folks, black history was not cherished and so, that’s what happens.
 The problem we’re
having as black historians to try and save those structures…
Jazma Sutton: And I feel like with this type of work, not saying that we’re gonna be able to do
that, but eventually, like, when universities and stuff get involved, and you can get the help for
writing grants, and being able to get things restored and better preserved and…
Participant: Because I’m having pushback on, they still don’t think African-American history is
important.
 In fact, I think there’s a blowback even more that we don’t wanna talk about that
history because right now the country is very split along racial lines.
 And, these are stories of
black superiority, and they destroy white superiority.
 The story they wanna tell is, which is ‘go
back where you came from, all people of color don’t really belong here.
’
Jazma Sutton: How far is Bren da Jet’s house from the [???]’s, umm…
Participant: It’s less than a quarter of a mile.

Jazma Sutton: Because, if it’s not too far, I would just wanna… because that land has been
black-owned for a long time.

Participant: Yes, that was Clemen’s land originally.
 Where are we going now? We’re going to
the Clemens cemetery? Okay.

Interviewer 2: What was the student population of the, like how many students went to…
Participant: There are probably over 1,000.

Jazma Sutton: Altogether?
Participant: Altogether.

Jazma Sutton: I remember one time I found a document, I think it said there was about 300, it
listed like 300 scholars.
 But I don’t know, like, at what time.

Participant: Well, yeah.
 The question is time frame.
 Because in 18… that’s when I had a problem
writing the nomination because I had to figure out, when was it really the Union Literary
Institute, and then it changed over to a grammar school.
 And, it was about 1875 that they started,
um…
Jazma Sutton: I found, um, what is it…
Participant: Clemens cemetery is this way.

Jazma Sutton: Um, the Smothers who was the principal of the Union Literary Institute, he was at
like the Association of Teachers in Ohio, or something.
 And in those records, each school talked
about the condition of the school and how many students were there, so in like 1860 I think he
said maybe somewhere between 12 and 30 were there.

Participant: Here is the Clemens cemetery.

Jazma Sutton: Aaah, okay.

Participant: If you wanna get a picture of the sign or whatever, it’s still an active cemetery.

Jazma Sutton: Can you take a photo of the cemetery? One right here and one right there…
Participant: Also, that white house right there is a log cabin, is a Bass log cabin.
 The Bass family.

Jazma Sutton: How long has it been there?
Participant: Well, they moved it from someplace, I’m not sure where they moved it to.
 But, it’s
been, it’s probably been there over a hundred years.
 And, probably older than that.

Jazma Sutton: Okay, we’ll take a photo of that too.
 I’mma tell…
Participant: That’s my next building that I would like to acquire, the cabin owned by the Bass
when they first settled in the 1820’s.

Jazma Sutton: And this is the same building? I mean of course, like…
Participant: Well, it was moved.
 But, it’s a log cabin underneath, yes.

Jazma Sutton: Who owns it now?
Participant: Um, William Jones’s family.
 It’s falling apart, but I told them it’s a historic place,
so, yeah, it is not being kept up…
Jazma Sutton: That is… wooooah.
 Yeah.
 You can like, get out and stand out in the grass.

Participant: I would love to acquire that house.

Jazma Sutton: Oh my gosh, this is my first time seeing this one!
Participant: I don’t have the resources to do anything.
 I’m drowning in trying to save the
buildings I’m trying to save.

Jazma Sutton: And you said it was, how old, since 18….
 I’m gonna yell that out the window.

Participant: What?
Jazma Sutton: How old the home is? He said there’s a log cabin underneath, it’s over a hundred
years old.

Participant: It’s more than that.
 [???]
Jazma Sutton: This is amazing.
 I’ve never seen this one, so I’m happy to see this.
 I trust you! And
we’re turning back around!
Participant: Yeah, we’re turning back around.
 And you wanted to go to Brenda’s father’s house?
Jazma Sutton: How far is it?
Participant: We were really close when we were at the Clemens house.

Jazma Sutton: We don’t have to go back!
Participant: Okay.

Jazma Sutton: And, this is pretty much it, ‘cuz we can get the Bass one as we’re leaving.

Participant: Bass cemetery coming back, okay.

Jazma Sutton: I don’t know how to turn it around.
 Oh, here’s a little parking….

Participant: I liked your example, what they did in St.
 Paul.

Jazma Sutton: Oh, Remembering Rondo?
Participant: I used to live in St.
 Paul, Minnesota, so…
Jazma Sutton: What a coincidence! Yeah,
Participant: Summit Hill
Jazma Sutton: The historian that did it had came to IU to talk about it, and…
Participant: Gentrified greatly.

Jazma Sutton: She was talking about like with the highway, going right over where they were
living at.

Participant: They found the path of least resistance which was through the black community.

They did that everywhere in the United States.

Jazma Sutton: Why is it saying ‘no key detected’? Oh God.
 Okay, I guess, can you just tell me
when the schoolhouse was built? How old is it?
Participant: I have around 17.
.
.
 18.
.
.
 1890, 1870, somewhere around there.
 Because, this is the
first building that I tried to put on the National Register.
 Um, learning about the National
Register, and when I told the story, they said the problem is, that building was built after most of
your story, when you talk about the Civil War.
 Also, it’s been changed what it had been.
 Again,
National [????], because of the addition, it’s been altered, and the windows and all that.
 So,
that’s when Brenda showed me the….

[Interview ends]